Tapply is useful because it splits up a
vector into,
into little pieces and it applies a, a
summary statistic or
function to those little pieces, and then
after it applies
a function it kind of brings the pieces
back together again.
So so split is not a loop function but
it's a very handy
function that can be used in conjunction,
with functions like lapply or sapply.
And so I just want to mention it here.
So split takes a vector.
So it's kind of like tapply, but it, but
it's like tapply but without applying the
summary statistics.
So what it does, is it takes a vector, or
an object x and it takes a factor
variable, f.
Which again identifies levels of a group.
And then it splits the object x into the
number of groups that are identified in,
in factor f.
So for example, if f has three levels
identifying three
groups, then the split function will split
x, into three groups.
And so, and then once you've got those
groups split apart, you can apply,
you can use lapply, or sapply to apply a
function to those individual groups.
So here is, is a simpler example, similar
to what I had before.
With tapply example, I've simulated a
normal 10 normal random variables
with mean zero, 10 uniforms, and 10
normal's with mean one.
And has created my factor variable here.
And now I'm just going to split the vector
into three parts.
Because because the factor variable has
three levels.
So now you can see when I split the x
vector.
The first, I got a list back and the first
element is 10 normals, the second element
is 10 uniforms and the third element,
which
gets a little cutoff here is 10 normals
again.
So that's what the split function does.
And now I've got a, so a split always
returns a list back.
And so if you want to do something with
this list, you can use lapply or sapply.
So, here for example, it is common to use
the lapply function in conjunction with
the split function, so
the idea that you split something that
lapply function over it.
Now, this case, this use of lapply and
split is not necessary, because
you can use the tapply function which will
do the same exact thing.
It's not anymore efficient or any worse to
do it this
way but the tapply function is a little
bit more compact.
But the nice thing about the split, using
the split function is
that it can be used to split much more
complicated types of objects.
So for example, here I've got a data frame
for.
I'm loading the data sets package and I'm,
and I'm
looking at the airquality data frame, from
the data sets package.
So, you can see that this is the first six
rows of the data, of this...
Data frame I think there's about a hundred
some rows total in this data frame.
And you see there are measurements on
ozone, solar radiation, wind, and
temperature, and
then the month and the day within that
month.
And so, one thing I might want to do is,
is calculate for
example the mean of ozone, solar
radiation,
wind and temperature in, within each
month.
So, so for in each month, there's you
know, 30 some observations.
And I want to calculate the mean within
each month.
All right, so how do I do this?
Well, what I'd like to do is I'd like to
split the data frame into monthly pieces.
And then once I've split data frame into
separate months, I can just calculate the
means, the column means using either apply
or call means, on those other variables.
[SOUND].
So that's what I've done here.
What I've done is I split the airquality
data frame and this,
and the factor I'm going to use to split
is the month variable.
So the month variable technically
speaking, in the data frame is not
a factor variable but it can be converted
into a factor variable,
because it only takes the values 5, 6, 7,
8 and 9.
Basically because the measurements are
only taken in
the, kind of, warmer months of the year.
So here I've split the airquality variable
according
to the month variable, and then I'm
going to apply.
An anonymous function and the anonymous
function here, what it does is
it takes the column means of just the
ozone, solar radiation and wind.
So I'm not going to take the mean of
temperature here.
So I'm just going to take the column means
of the,
those three variables for each month each
column monthly data frames.
So here you can see the results.
You can't see them all but you can see
most of them into
lapply is returning a list back, where
each element of the list is
a vector of length three which is, which
is the mean for ozone,
the mean for solar radiation and the mean
for wind, within that month.
As you can see that
for, for most of the months the ozone
value is
NA and that's because when I take the mean
of that
column there are, and there are missing
values in that column
and I can't take the mean if there are
missing values.
So the, the result, when I think the mean
is that I just get a missing value back.
So one thing I can do is I can.
So before I fix the missing value problem,
I can also call sapply here.
And the idea is that sapply, instead of
returning me a list, it will simplify the
result because each element
of the returned list has a, has a vector
of length 3.
They're all the same length.
So what I'll do is put, put all these
numbers into a matrix.
Where the three rows and in this case 5
columns.
So here you can see the monthly means.
For each of the three variables, in a much
more
compact format, it's in a matrix, instead
of a list.
Of course I still got NA's for a lot of
them, because the missing values
in the original data.
So one thing I knew is I was going to pass
the na.rm argument to call
means that would remove the missing values
from each column, before its calculating
the mean.
And that, now when I call sapply on the
split list, I can get the, the
means of the observed values for each of
the three variables for each of the five
months.
So, so split is a very handy function for
splitting arbitrary
objects according to the levels of the
factor and then applying any type of
function.
To those split elements of that list.
And so here I split a data frame, you can
split
other lists, you can, and, or other kinds
of things too.
[SOUND].
So the last thing I want to talk about is
splitting on more than one level.
So you, in the past couple of examples
what I've, I've only had a single factor
variable.
And I've
split whatever the object is with a vector
or a data frame.
According to the levels of that single
factor.
But you might have more than one factor.
For example, you might have a variable,
that, you
know, it's gender, so it has male and
female.
And you might have another variable.
That has, for example, the race.
And so, you might want to look at
the combination of the levels within those
factors.
And so so here, we've got, I've got f1,
which is a factor with two levels.
And so I've simulated
a normal random variable with 10, with 10
observations.
I've got a factor with two levels, and
each repeated
five times, and then I've got another
factor with five levels.
If repeated two times.
So there are my kind of two category, two
group, grouping variables here.
And I want to look at the kind of
combination of the two.
So I can use the interaction function to
combine all the levels
of the first one with the, all the levels
of the second one.
And so because there are two levels in the
first
factor and there is five levels in the
second factor
and there is a, the total combination of
10 different
levels that you can have when you combine
the two together.
So when you see, when I call, when I
called the
interaction function I get another factor,
that kind of concatenates the
levels of one with the other, and you can
see that
it prints out that there is a total of ten
levels.
Okay.
So, what now I can slit my numeric vector
x according to the two different levels.
So now, when I Iike, when I use, now one
thing, when
I use the split function I don't have to
use the interaction function.
I can just pass it a list with the two
factors and it will
automatically call the interaction
function for me,
and create that 10 level interaction
factor.
So I can just pass the list of these two
factors in it, and you can that, it
create, it returns
me a list with the levels of
the 10 different kind of interaction
factor levels.
And then and then, and then the elements
of
the numeric factors that are within those
10 levels.
Now of course there are, although there
are 10 levels between
the two different factors, that we don't
exactly observe every single combination.
And so there are some empty levels here
and you
can see that some of these levels have
nothing in them.
They have zero elements, whereas other
levels have a number in it.
And so, so one thing you can do.
Well first I can, I could take this list
and, and,
and lapply or sapply a function over it,
if I wanted to.
But, sometimes it's a little bit handy to
not have to keep these empty levels.
So, so the split function has an argument
called drop.
And if you specify drop equals true, it
will drop.
The empty levels, that are created by the
splitting.
And, and this can be very handy, when
you're, you're combining,
multiple different factors.
If you're only using a single factor, then
doesn't, that argument doesn't really
do anything, because you'll just use all
the, all the levels but, usually.
But if you have multiple factors then
typically you're going to have empty
levels, just because you don't observe
every single combination of the two
factors.
So, so drop equals true will drop those
empty levels and then you can have,
you'll, you'll will be returned a list,
with
only the levels, that have observations in
them.
[SOUND].